# Investment Decision Criteria - part 1

*Source: Investment Decision Criteria - part 1.pptx | Extracted: 2026-06-17*

---

### Slide 1

UMET9G-30-1 Accounting and Finance for Decision Making Investment Appraisal – part 1, Payback Period and ARR

---

### Slide 2

Recap The last study unit covered: The need for financial analysis The key classification of ratios Use of Key Ratios Interpretation of the Key ratios

---

### Slide 3

Learning Outcomes

---

### Slide 4

A Balance Sheet Equation - Reminder Capital Assets  =  Equity  +  Liabilities Return

---

### Slide 5

Role of Finance in Corporations The three decisions of financial management are: 5 Corporate Finance Investment Decision Financing Decision Liquidity Question: How can a financial manager take an investment decision that creates value to the company? Capital budgeting - deciding the long-term projects in which the company should invest. This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC

---

### Slide 6

Investment appraisal Shareholders invest funds for a reason … a return! Return is generated by management investing in real assets Managers need to analyse different investment opportunities

---

### Slide 7

Capital Budgeting A project can be: 7 Independent, the cash flows have no impact on the acceptance or rejection of other projects. This project can be analysed separately. Mutually exclusive, the project competes with other projects. Taking one project will mean rejecting other projects. Good decision-making criterion should: Be intuitive (cash inflows exceed cash outflows) Have a known unit of measurements Have a benchmark Be easy to communicate and comparable

---

### Slide 8

Capital Budgeting – 4 methods Payback Period (PP) - how quickly the cash flows generated by the project cover the initial investment 8 Net Present Value (NPV) – the sum of the present values of each of the cash flows (positive as well as negative) that occurs over the life of the project. Accounting Rate of Return (ARR) - measures the average annual accounting profit from an investment as a percentage of its average investment cost The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) - takes into account the project’s scale. The IRR is he discount rate that makes the NPV of a project equal to zero. It is a percentage.

---

### Slide 9

Investment Decisions in Industry American Airlines announced the purchase of 460 aircraft over the period 2013 to 2022. Estimated cost of more than £12 bn. UK High speed rail investment (HS2) - £56bn, due to open 2027???? Update required - £108bn+ - opening???? JCB invested £50m in a new UK plant which was due to create 200 jobs by 2022. Brittany Ferries launched a new ship in 2017.	Cost - £225m. Channel Tunnel £4.60bn (at 1985 prices). UWE £50m invested in a new Business School – opened 2017. UWE £22m invested in a new Engineering building – opened 2021

---

### Slide 10

Issues to consider The market environment Level of demand for proposed activity The internal environment Culture and capabilities of the company Types and levels of cost elements in the proposed area of activity Understanding of the risk &amp; uncertainty of the project

---

### Slide 11

Investment Appraisal 11 Up-front Cost Salvage Value A project analysed in capital budgeting has three characteristics : A large up-front cost Cash flows for a specific period of time A salvage value at the end – the estimated liquidation value of the project’s assets at the end of its life.

---

### Slide 12

Payback Period Measurement unit – The PP is always expressed in years. 12 Payback Period - how quickly the cash flows generated by the project cover the initial investment Decision Rule – There is no universal benchmark for the PP. Each company has its own benchmark ( i ) Independent project : Accept a project if PP &lt; benchmark. (ii) Mutually exclusive : Accept project with shortest PP, as long as PP &lt; benchmark.

---

### Slide 13

Payback Period  Example Example 1 – Investment Decision Shoez Co. plans to launch a new shoe line and must choose between two designs. These projects are mutually exclusive. They have an internal benchmark for Payback of 3years. Design 1: has an initial cost of $100,000 and a salvage value of $25,000 after four years. Design 2: has an initial cost of $100,000 and a salvage value of $50,000 after four years. The net cash flows from both projects are: Which project should Shoez Co. choose? 13 Year 1 2 3 4 Design 1 ($/year) 25,000 29,000 32,000 35,000 Design 2 ($/year) 15,000 20,000 25,000 18,000

---

### Slide 14

Capital Budgeting – Payback Period The cash flows associated with Design 1 are: Year 1 2 3 4 Design 1 ($/year) 25,000 29,000 32,000 35,000 Design 1: has an initial cost of $100,000 and a salvage value of $25,000 after four years, and the following net cash flows: Year 0 1 2 3 4 Design 1 Cash Flow ($/year) -100,000 25,000 29,000 32,000 60,000 Cumulative Cash Flows -100,000 -75,000 -46,000 -14,000 46,000 The PP is therefore: Shoez Co. will recover its initial investment of -$100,000 in approximately 3 years and 3 months.

---

### Slide 15

Capital Budgeting – Payback Period Design 2: There is an initial cost of $100,000 and a salvage value of $50,000 after four years. The net cash flows from Design 2 are below. What is this project’s PP? Which project should Shoez Co. choose? 15 Year 1 2 3 4 Design 2 ($/year) 15,000 20,000 25,000 18,000 The PP is 3.59 years So which project should be accept? Show we accept, 1 or 2 , both or neither?!

---

### Slide 16

Capital Budgeting – Payback Period The PP is seldom used as the only decision-making criterion, but it is commonly used because it is: Quick to calculate. Easy to understand and communicate. Provides indication of project’s risk Favours low risk projects Biased towards liquidity – favours projects which free up cash quickly. Suitable where funds are tight 16 However, it: Ignores time value of money. Requires an arbitrary benchmark. Ignores all cash flows after the cut-off year. Biased against long-term projects (R&amp;D, New technologies).

---

### Slide 17

Accounting Rate of Return (ARR) Definition: Average annual profit as a percentage of average investment over the life of the project Decision rule: Accept if greater than the target set by the business e.g. 10%

---

### Slide 18

Accounting Rate of Return (ARR) ARR (%)= x 100 Average annual profit = Average investment = Note: With the average investment calculation you will need to consider any working capital investment, if it is required!!!

---

### Slide 19

Accounting Rate of Return (ARR) - Example Charging Ltd has carried out some research that shows that the business could provide a standard service that it has recently developed. Provision of the service would require investment in a machine that would cost £ 100,000, payable immediately. Sales of the service would take place throughout the next five years. At the end of that time, it is estimated that the machine could be sold for £ 20,000.

---

### Slide 20

Accounting Rate of Return (ARR) Total profit before depreciation = (20+40+60+60+20) = 200 Total depreciation = 100 – 20 = 80 Total profit after depreciation = 200 – 80 = 120 Average annual profit = 120 / 5 = 24 Average investment  = (100 + 20) / 2 = 60 ARR = 24/60 = 40% ARR (%)= x 100

---

### Slide 21

Working Capital - ARR Working Capital (WC) is the capital of a business which is used in its day-to-day trading operations. If a business is to expand and invest in new projects and assets, then additional working capital is generally required. The key issue that must be remembered here is that an increase in working capital is a cash outflow. If a company needs to buy more inventories, for example, there will be a cash cost. Equally a decrease in working capital is a cash inflow. Hence at the end of a project when the working capital invested in that project is no longer required, a cash inflow will arise. It is the change in working capital that is the cash flow.

---

### Slide 22

Working Capital  - Example If a new 5 year project is to be implemented then an additional £50,000 working capital will be required at the start. No further adjustments to the working capital will be required for the remaining life of the project. At the end of the project the £50,000 working capital is no longer required. How will the working capital impact upon the relevant cash flows of the project? Year 0 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 -£50k £0 £0 £0 £0 +£50k

---

### Slide 23

Impact of WC on ARR ARR (%)= x 100 Average annual profit = Average investment = Note: With the average investment calculation you will need to consider any working capital investment, if it is required!!! + WC

---

### Slide 24

Accounting Rate of Return (ARR) Advantages Consistent with R.O.C.E. measure of performance. Readily understood as a %. Disadvantages Use of averages smooths large annual fluctuations. Ignores time value of money Uses accounting profit rather than cash

---

### Slide 25

ARR Limitation : Using averages????? A business is evaluating three competing projects. All three involve investment in a machine that is expected to have no residual value at the end of the five years. In this example, each project has the same total operating profit over the five years, £200,000. This gives same average profit of £200,000 / 5 years = £40,000 and the same average investment of £80,000, (that is, £160,000/2). This means that each project will have the same ARR of 50% (£40,000 / £80,000). In this situation ARR fails to distinguish between the 3 projects, it does not take into consider the time value of money. Project C clearly generates a higher proportion of profit in the first year. A B C £'000 £'000 £'000 Investment Year 0 (160) (160) (160) Operating profit Year 1 20 10 160 Operating profit Year 2 40 10 10 Operating profit Year 3 60 10 10 Operating profit Year 4 60 10 10 Operating profit Year 5 20 160 10

---

### Slide 26

Learning Outcomes Covered

---

### Slide 27

Next Week Net Present Value and IRR

---

