# Investment Decision Criteria-part 2

*Source: Investment Decision Criteria-part 2.pptx | Extracted: 2026-06-17*

---

### Slide 1

UMET9G-30-1 Accounting and Finance for Decision Making Investment Appraisal – part 2, NPV and IRR

---

### Slide 2

Recap Last week we covered: Understanding Capital Budgeting Decision Making Identify four key investments appraisal techniques used in industry Consider Payback period and ARR and how they are used and calculated Review the advantages and disadvantages of the techniques

---

### Slide 3

Learning Outcomes

---

### Slide 4

Recap: Why…. Capital Assets  =  Equity  +  Liabilities Return Shareholders (owners!) invest funds for a reason… a return! Return is generated by management investing in real assets, so managers need to analyse different investment opportunities.

---

### Slide 5

Key characteristics Method:						Calculated using: Accounting Rate of Return 			Profits Payback Period					Cash Flows Net Present Value					Cash Flows Internal Rate of Return				Cash Flows Remember one of the key disadvantages of ARR &amp; Payback is that they do not consider the timing of profits or cash flows.

---

### Slide 6

Recap: Time Value of Money You are offered £1,000 now or £1,000 in one year’s time. What would you choose? £1,000 now. Why? Risk Inflation Investment Opportunities Cost of Capital, e.g. pay off a loan So money has a time value! If interest rates are 10% per year, the future value of £1,000 will be £1,100 in year one and £1,210 in year 2. Alternatively we can say that £1,100 in one year has a present value of £1,000. The further into the future we go, the lower the net present value, i.e. £1,000 now is worth more than £1,000 in 5 years time. NPV takes into account the Time Value of Money!

---

### Slide 7

Net Present Value Example 1 – Investment Decision Shoez Co. plans to launch a new shoe line and must choose between two designs. These projects are mutually exclusive. Using a discount rate of 7%, which design should Shoez Co. choose? Design 1: has an initial cost of $100,000 and a salvage value of $25,000 after four years. Design 2: has an initial cost of $100,000 and a salvage value of $50,000 after four years. 7 Year 1 2 3 4 Design 1 ($/year) 25,000 29,000 32,000 35,000 Design 2 ($/year) 15,000 20,000 25,000 18,000 The net present value (NPV) of any project is the sum of the present values of each of the cash flows—positive as well as negative—that occurs over the life of the project. :

---

### Slide 8

Capital Budgeting – NPV The present value of the cash inflows generated by project cash flows is: The initial outflow is $100,000, therefore, the net present value (NPV) of the project is: 8 Design 1: has an initial cost of $100,000 and will have a scrap value of $25,000 after four years.

---

### Slide 9

Capital Budgeting – Net Present Value The net present value (NPV) of any project is the sum of the present values of each of the cash flows—positive as well as negative—that occurs over the life of the project Where : cash flow in year and : the initial investment : the discount rate (or hurdle rate) : the life of the project 9 Measurement unit The NPV is always expressed in monetary units. Decision Rule ( i ) Independent project: Accept a project if NPV &gt; 0. (ii) Mutually exclusive: Accept project with highest NPV as long as 	NPV &gt; 0.

---

### Slide 10

Capital Budgeting – NPV Design 2: has an initial cost of $100,000 and a salvage value of $50,000 after four years. The generated cash flows from both projects are: Using a discount rate of 7%, what is the NPV of Design 2? Would the company accept this project? Which project should the company choose? 10 Year 1 2 3 4 Design 2 ($/year) 15,000 20,000 25,000 18,000

---

### Slide 11

Net Present Value – the discount factor The discount factor can also be referred to as the following: the cost of capital the annual rate of return the present value factor BUT REMEMBER!!! The discount factor for year 0 (NOW) is always 1.00

---

### Slide 12

Net Present Value Project A Project B Cash Flow Disc. Factor Disc. CF Cash Flow Disc. Factor Disc. CF 10% 10% 0 (100,000) x 1 = (100,000) 0 (20,000) x 1 = (20,000) 1 50,000 x 0.909 = 45,450 1 10,000 x 0.909 = 9,090 2 50,000 x 0.826 = 41,300 2 20,000 x 0.826 = 16,520 3 50,000 x 0.751 = 37,550 3 20,000 x 0.751 = 15,020 NPV = 24,300 NPV = 20,630 Which one should we choose? Project A provides a higher NPV. But Project B requires much less capital investment.

---

### Slide 13

Capital Budgeting – NPV The NPV is a preferred decision-making criterion because it: all cash flows used. timing of cash flows taken into account. calculations easy to make with tables. directly shows change to shareholders’ wealth as a result of the decision. allows variable discount rates to account for different economic circumstances. can be aggregated across all projects. However, it: is stated in absolute value and does not provide a percentage return on the initial investment. does not control for the life of the project and is biased towards projects with longer lives. is based on forecasted cash flows which could lead to errors. required rate of return difficult to ascertain. not easily understood by non-finance staff. 13

---

### Slide 14

Internal Rate of Return (IRR) The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) takes into account the project’s scale, therefore, offsetting the NPV bias toward long-term projects. It calculates the percentage at which the investment proposal breaks-even, recognising that money has a time value. The IRR is a percentage term, therefore, it can be used to compare different projects. The IRR = the discount rate that makes the NPV of a project equal to zero. 14 The investment decision: Proceed with the project if its IRR is higher than the company’s requirement return.

---

### Slide 15

IRR is an NPV of zero?? Year 0 1 2 3 Cash Flow (100,000) 50,000 50,000 50,000 Disc. Cash Flow (100,000) 45,450 41,300 37,550 NPV   =   24,300 Disc. Factor (10%) 1.000 0.909 0.826 0.751 = = = = x x x x In this example we can see that the project will generate positive NPV when a 10% discount factor is applied, £24,300. Because the NPV is positive this means that this project is generating a return greater than 10% . If the calculation had produced a negative NPV then we would reject the project because the project is generating a return less than 10%. Therefore, if the project generated an NPV of exactly £0 (zero) then we can say that this project generates a return which is equal to the discount factor applied, in other words 10%. This is the IRR.

---

### Slide 16

IRR - example Therefore, the IRR lies between 20% and 22%, closer to 22%

---

### Slide 17

IRR - example At 10% the NPV is £4,913 so in order to reduce the NPV we must increase the discount rate If we discount the project flows at 22% we get an NPV of (£81) IRR = where NPV 1 is the NPV at an interest rate i 1 etc. IRR =  21.8%

---

### Slide 18

IRR in Excel Excel – much easier We start by a creating a table in Excel including all cash flows. 18 Year 0 1 2 3 4 Design 1 ($/year) -100,000 25,000 29,000 32,000 60,000 Using the Excel Function =IRR( _cash flows_ ), we get:

---

### Slide 19

IRR – Benefits and Drawbacks The benefits of IRR: all cash flows used. timing of cash flows taken into account. calculations easy to make with tables. directly shows change to shareholders’ wealth as a result of the decision. allows variable discount rates to account for different economic circumstances. can be aggregated across all projects. However, it: is stated in absolute value and does not provide a percentage return on the initial investment. does not control for the life of the project and is biased towards projects with longer lives. is based on forecasted cash flows which could lead to errors. required rate of return difficult to ascertain. not easily understood by non-finance staff. 19

---

### Slide 20

Other factors to be considered source of finance cost of capital total estimated cost of project taxation implications working capital requirements audit of project economic climate, political implications, length of commissioning, training, location, capacity

---

### Slide 21

Learning Outcomes Covered

---

### Slide 22

Next Week Sources of Finance

---

